We had a look at how you can select elements in the DOM with query selector, with get element
by ID and so on,
we also had a look at how you can then use these elements to manipulate them or to simply read data from
them.
Now there is another connected concept, connected to selecting elements which is typically known as
traversing the DOM
and what does traversing the DOM mean?
It means that once you selected one element, one node therefore, you might be interested in diving into
all of its child nodes, for example to add it all list items in a list or anything like that,
so rather than manually selecting every element you might be interested in with query selector or so on,
you could take an element which you already did select and then move to its children or its siblings
and so on
based on that element, that's what's traversing the DOM means. Now for that, I
first of all want to clarify a couple of terms which I'll use - children, descendants, parent and ancestors
because it's important to understand what these things mean.
So let's have a look at what child or children means, what descendant or descendants mean, what parent
or parents mean and what ancestor or ancestors mean.
Now when I say child, if I speak about a child element when talking about these DOM traversal methods
you learned about, then this always means a direct child node or an element, so an element node
and with that I mean that here in this small example, the paragraph is a child of the div because it's
a direct child element, it's directly below the div, one layer below it
so to say, the em tag, the emphasized tag however isn't because whilst the em tag is still kind of nested
inside of the div tag, it's not a direct child,
the paragraph, the p tag is in between,
so the p tag is a child, the em tag is not a child of the div in this case. Now descendant on the other
hand is a direct or indirect child node or element,
so when we talk about a descendant, then in the same example both the paragraph but also the the em tag would
be descendants of div.
So p, the paragraph tag is a child and a descendant,
the em tag is not a child but a descendant of div
in this example. Now a parent and ancestor are kind of the opposite -
a parent node or element is the direct parent node or element of another element,
so in this example here still, the div is a parent of the paragraph but not of em for the same reason
as em is not a child of the div and the ancestor on the other hand,
if I talk about an ancestor element or node, then this is a direct or indirect parent relation,
so there for example in that same example, we have div as an ancestor of both the paragraph and the em tag,
so that is important, that's an important differentiation,
it will be important to keep in mind when talking about the DOM traversal and what you can do there.
Now as i said, DOM traversal means that you have a selected element, a selected node,
let's say this div element node here and now you want to dive into some of the surrounding or nested
elements or nested nodes and there, you've got a couple of directions into which you can go.
You can always go up, so find a parent element or node with parent node or parent element,
so with these specific properties which every DOM object will have,
so every element object which you can select no matter if it's a div or a paragraph or whatever, it will
have this parent node and parent element property,
the difference being that parent node selects any parent node whereas parent element only selects
a parent node that also is an element,
so only parent HTML elements.
There also is the closest method which you can use, to not just take a direct parent but take any ancestor
that matches a certain CSS query
and I'll show you how all of these work in action in the next lectures of course.
Now of course, you can also go the opposite direction and instead of reaching out to a parent or ancestor
element, you can also reach out to a child or descendent element.
There you have child nodes and children, child nodes to select all
child nodes including text nodes, children to only select child element nodes, so only HTML
element objects
and of course as I also showed you already, you can use query selector, get elements by a class name and
so on on any selected element node as well,
so these are also methods which are always available on any selected element object and therefore
you can always use these to dive deeper into all the descendants you might find there in that part of
the DOM tree based on that element which you already selected.
Now there also are special properties you can use to get the first child which selects the first child
node and first element child to select the first element child node of a given element and the same is
available for the last child, the last child node and the last element child node which you can select
for a given element. So that's for going up in the DOM tree or going deeper into the DOM tree, so into
nested elements,
now maybe you want to stay on the same level and want to select sibling elements. For that, you've got
the previous sibling and previous element sibling properties on any DOM object which allows you to get
the direct sibling of an element and that of course works in both directions to get the sibling before
or after the currently selected element and previous sibling and next sibling give you the next sibling
node, previous elements sibling and next element sibling give you the next element node that is a sibling
of the selected node. So that's the theory,
let's have a look at it in practice.